## Read this paper and think about the following questions:

**Why is important to construct a CNV map on health individuals of various ethnicities? (Introduction)**

Since differetnt ethnicities/population have different gene-pools and gene frequencies, it is important to map individuals from various etnicities.  

**What is the CNV size that the authors defined? (Box 1 mentioned in introduction)**

a deletion/duplication which is larger than 50bp to 3Mbp is called CNV.  

**What are the primary approaches used for CNV detection? And what are the advantages and limitations for these technologies? (CNV discoveries)**

**Microarrays**
* comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
*  SNP-based arrays
*  BAC

and **NGS** are the primary approaches for CNV detection.

**Problems:** no single discovery strategy can capture the entire spectrum of structural variations in the genome and have lack of probes in regions with segmental duplications. And due to this a lot of approaches are unable to recognize manny CNVs that are partly responsible in human diseas.  
Deletions are generally easier to identify, and methods vary in their ability to detect deletions or duplications. For example, more duplications are missed by SNP-based array platforms and NGS approaches than by array CGH.  

**Microarrays**  
Pros:  
- The array-based detection methods are suitable for studying quantitative variants.  

Cons:  
- Old array-based methods have inflated estimates of the total CNV content, due to low resolution and overestimation of the breakpoints.  
- Miss variants that are small.  
- limited resolution capacity


**NGS:**  
Pros:  
- high sensitivity and the ability to provide accurate sequence-level breakpoint resolution
- Can call small variants.  

Cons:  
- Biased towards detection of deletions.  

**The authors used clustering method to combine data from different studies into merged CNVRs (Copy number variable regions). What are the two criteria for cluster filtering? And why did they do this filtering? (The CNV map)**

Clusters were filtered on the basis:
- of the number of distinct subjects that carry the variant  
- the number of distinct studies with at least one variant in the cluster  
 
They used a CNVR-clustering algorithm to identify sets of variants in which every possible variant pair had at least 50% reciprocal overlap.

**What are thresholds in stringency level 1, inclusive map (stringency level 2), and stringent map (stringency level 12) respectively? (The CNV map)**

- **stringency level 1:** at least one subject and one study.  
- **stringency level 2:** at least two subjects and one study for each variant (inclusive map)
- **stringency level 12:** at least two subjects and two studies (stringent map)   

**Which percentage of the genome contributes to CNV in inclusive map and stringency map respectively?(Properties of the CNV map)**

**inclusive map:** 9.5% involved in CNV losses/gains  
**stringent map:** 4.8% involved in CNV losses/gains, which is 50% less than in the inclusive map.  

**By your intuition, which kind of genes are more variable between protein-coding genes and non-coding genes? How about their findings in this paper? (Functional impact of CNV)**

intuition: non-coding genes are more variable in

**The authors generated a null CNV map and found genes for which at least 85% of the exons were homozygous deleted. What are the functions of these genes? And why did the authors say that they seem to be non-essential? (Homozygous deleted genes)**

The function of non-essential genes may be redundant or they may be related to late-onset phenotypic consequences that **do not** substantially reduce the fitness.  
Some of the non-essential genes from our list are described in OMIM as:
- age-related phenotypes 
- Rh-negative blood type 
- delayed AIDS from HIV-1 infection 
- susceptibility to multiple sclerosis  
- autoimmune disease  
- placental function and fetal wellbeing 

**If you are a medical doctor, how do you use this map as a tool to assess the clinical importance of a CNV? (Clinical application of the CNV map part in Discussion)**

This map can be used as a tool in the investigation of CNVs for medical applications9,15,32. To assess the clinical importance of a CNV found in a case subject, the criteria could include:  
- whether it is found among the CNVRs of the CNV map 
- whether it overlaps with medically relevant genes
