# Genomic data risks & opportunities
## Backstory and goals of 23andMe as the first company offering autosomal DNA testing for ancestry
23andMe first introduced its kit as a [“fun way to learn a little genetics using yourself as a test subject”](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/23andme-is-terrifying-but-not-for-the-reasons-the-fda-thinks/). The American company advertised them on their website and explained that their goal is to “connect you to the 23 paired volumes of your own genetic blueprint... bringing you personal insight into ancestry, genealogy, and inherited traits”. At first, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had little problem with the promises 23andMe gave its customers, that is until they were inching closer to marketing their services as a way of predicting and preventing health problems: according to federal law, kits intended to cure, treat or diagnose a disease, needs to be classed as safe and effective by the FDA. And 23andMe was not the only company marketing their services in such a way.
Mid-2009 was when 23andMe started negotiating with the FDA and only in July 2012, they began the process of getting clearance to sell their kits – which they had already been selling for five years. In May 2013, 23andMe missed its deadlines with the FDA, cut contact with the agency and effectively annulled the clearance process. The FDA, in turn, had to take action and sent 23andMe a warning letter, which resulted in 23andMe only being allowed to provide ancestry reports and raw data to its customers. Two years later, in October 2015, a “new 23andMe experience” was launched (according to 23andMe’s website) which was granted FDA authorization: the first direct-to-consumer test available directly to individuals in the United States. Since then, new testing kits by 23andMe and other similar platforms offering genetic testing have always received FDA authorization before their release.

Charles Seife, an American author, journalist and professor at NYU, has written an article for [Scientific American](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/23andme-is-terrifying-but-not-for-the-reasons-the-fda-thinks/) concerning 23andMe, claiming that “the genetic-testing company's real goal is to hoard your personal data”. He justified his assertion by comparing 23andMe with Google: Anne Wojcicki, a co-founder of 23andMe who was, at the time when the article was written (2013), married to Sergei Brin, the founder of Google. Seife explained that Google billed itself as a faithful servant of the consumer when it first launched and as we know now, the purpose of Google was not to help people search but to hoard information – be it query entries, information from cookies, or personally identifiable data from our computer hardware and networks. This information is stored indefinitely and has become Google’s real asset: It is divided to advertisers to target you, leading to Google making more than $10 billion every quarter. 23andMe’s Personal Genome Service is what the search engine is to Google, so Seife, and the aim of it is not to make money by selling kits, but to get base level data – which is also why the price of the kits are lowered again and again. They are sifting through their genomic database for medical research, which is also what other Direct-to-Consumer Genomic Testing sites are doing

## Benefits of genetic testing
Genetic testing has advantages and disadvantages. The benefits of genetic testing include:
* **Early Disease Detection and Prevention**: Identify genetic predispositions to certain diseases, allowing for early detection and proactive prevention strategies
* **Personalized Medicine**: Tailor medical treatments and therapies based on an individual's genetic makeup. This can enhance treatment efficacy and reduce adverse reactions.
* **Risk Assessment and Management**: Insights into individual’s genetic risks for certain diseases, can lead them to change their lifestyle (if necessary).
* **Medical and Research Advancements**: deeper understanding of genetics, diseases, and potential advancements in medical treatments and drug development.
* **Ancestry and Heritage**: Genetic testing for ancestry purposes can provide individuals with insights into their heritage, lineage, and ethnic background, fostering a sense of connection to their roots and understanding of their cultural history.

## Personal opinion and disadvantages of genetic testing
Personally, I think it is not a secret anymore nowadays, that companies such as 23andMe and MyHeritage are ‘hoarding’ our genome data. What is still unknown to most people however, is what these companies do with our data – what advantages there are (e.g., what was listed above). We know that there are bad people doing or trying to do bad things, such as hacking and stealing databases. Well, that is exactly [what happened](https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/10/06/23andme-hacked-data/) on October 6, 2023: Hackers stole a part of 23andMe’s database and shared it on dark web forums. A hacker is offering to sell customers’ records identifying names, locations and ethnicities. What makes this event worse, in my opinion, is that the hacker is advertising by compiling a long list of people with Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry and sharing it on different forums. Although the list “only” contains the people’s first and last name, sex, 23andMe’s ancestry evaluation, and possible relatives, and not the actual DNA, it can still lead to targeted attacks on specific groups of people by dangerous individuals.

So, when it comes to disadvantages of genetic testing, then not only is your data never 100% safe, these tests also have limited predictive power, meaning you cannot predict the timeline of onset of possible predispositions to certain diseases. Results from these tests can induce psychological stress, anxiety, or even depression and can lead to genetic discrimination depending on which country one lives in. Additionally, the genetic data is not very diverse and cannot represent the whole world accurately (yet).

Weighing the advantages and disadvantages of sharing genome data, I can understand why some people are cautious of sharing their DNA. Every human has different ways of dealing with new information and for me personally, I think I would rather want to know about potential high risks for specific diseases/conditions, than not know and be “surprised” in case of an occurrence of a disease. In case of a diagnosis, I would also be able to profit from personalized medical treatment, increasing the likelihood of recovery. Knowing my risks, I could set different priorities for my life and go through it better prepared. My main concern when it comes to my own data is that in the future, one might be able to do a lot more harm with the data than right now and that laws securing privacy might get more relaxed or even repealed. Additionally, because I think the way 23andMe handled the situation in 2013 was very questionable, I cannot assume one certain stance when it comes to sharing my own data. If there was a way of knowing that my genome data is 100% safe and will not be used by the companies to profit further than what was promised, then I think I would consider doing a test and sharing my genome data.

