# A copy number variation map of the human genome

## Why is important to construct a CNV map on health individuals of various ethnicities? (Introduction)
To construct an updated CNV map of the human genome. To have healthy controls to be used in particular diases studies
## What is the CNV size that the authors deﬁned? (Box 1 mentioned in introduction)
From 50 bp to 3 Mb
## What are the primary approaches used for CNV detection? And what are the advantages and limitations for these technologies? (CNV discoveries)
Currently, no single discovery strategy can capture everything. Often the platforms have a lack of probes in regions of the genome that contain segmental duplications.
Microarrays; Using larg insert clones (BACs) and oligonucleotide arrays.
Pro: Suitable for quantitative variants, Better in detecting duplicates
Con: Miss many CNVs that are small, limited resolution (450 bp).
Next-Generation Sequencing;
Pro: Can better detection of smaller variants, HIgh sensitivity, provide high sequence-lvele breakpoint resolution.
Con: Bias towards detection of deletions


## The authors used clustering method to combine data from diﬀerent studies into merged CNVRs (Copy number variable regions). What are the two criteria for cluster ﬁltering? And why did they do this ﬁltering? (The CNV map) 
Clusters are filtered based on the number of distinct subjects that carry the variant and the number of distinct studies with at least one variant in the cluster. The filter based on the number of subjects excluded singletons, and variants tht re supported by a larger number of subjects are less likely to be false positives. The filter base on the number of studies ensured the exclusion of potential study-specific artefacts.
## What are thresholds in stringency level 1, inclusive map (stringency level 2), and stringent map (stringency level 12) respectively? (The CNV map) 
* Stringency level 1:
Map supported by at least one subject and one study
* Stringency level 2:
Map supported by at least two subjects and one study for each variant
* Stringeny level 12 ( stringent map ):
Map supported by at least two subjects and two studies

## Which percentage of the genome contributes to CNV in inclusive map and stringency map respectively? (Properties of the CNV map) 
* In inclusive map: 9.5 % of the genome contribute to CNV
* In stringent map: 4.8 % of the genome contribute to CNV

## By your intuition, which kind of genes are more variable between protein-coding genes and non-coding genes? How about their ﬁndings in this paper? (Functional impact of CNV) 
Protein-coding genes are probably more conserved due to their importance. A small change in phenotype could contribute to deadly phenotypes. In non-coding genes effect of CNV are not filtered out so much, because individuals might survive more variation there.
The study found that exons show more variability that the background. Underlining the hypothesis from before, the exons of non-coding genes had the highest proportions of copy number variable sequence, which was higher than the exons of protein-coding genes.
## The authors generated a null CNV map and found genes for which at least 85% of the exons were homozygous deleted. What are the functions of these genes? And why did the authors say that they seem to be non-essential? (Homozygous deleted genes) 
These genes would seem to be non-essential, as they could be missing from the genomes of apparently healthy individuals. 
Examples of genes in that group:
* OMIM - age related phenoytpes
* RHD Rh-negative blood type
* KIR3DL1 delayed AID from HIV-1 infection 
* HLA-DRB1 susceptibility to multiple sclerosis
* HLA-DQA1 autoimmune disease
* placental function and fetal wellbeing

## If you are a medical doctor, how do you use this map as a tool to assess the clinical importance of a CNV? (Clinical application of the CNV map part in Discussion)
You can use the map to asses the clinical importance of a CNV found in a case subject.
--> does it overlap with medically relevant genes?
A CNV found in a patient that overlaps with any of these genes while not being found in the CNV map would suggest medical importance; in particular, CNVs that are associated with the more stringent gene sets, such as DECIPHER critical genes and embryonically lethal genes, would have a higher likelihood of pathogenicity.


