# Different file formats:

## SAM:
Sequence Alignment Map (SAM) is a text-based format originally for storing biological sequences aligned to a reference sequence.
It is widely used for storing data, such as nucleotide sequences, generated by next generation sequencing technologies.

## BAM:
A BAM file (*.bam) is the compressed binary version of a SAM file that is used to represent aligned sequences up to 128 Mb.
BAM files use the file naming format of SampleName_S#.bam, where # is the sample number determined by the order that samples are 
listed for the run. In multi-node mode, the S# is set to S1, regardless the order of the sample.

## CRAM:
CRAM files are alignment files like BAM files. They represent a compressed version of the alignment. This compression is driven by 
the reference the sequence data is aligned to. While BAM files contain all sequence data within a file, CRAM files are smaller by 
taking advantage of an additional external "reference sequence" file. This file is needed to both compress and decompress the read information.

## VCF:
VCF is a text file format (most likely stored in a compressed manner). It contains meta-information lines, a header line, and then data lines 
each containing information about a position in the genome. There is an option whether to contain genotype information on samples for each position 
or not.

## FASTA:
FASTA format is a text-based format for representing either nucleotide sequences or peptide sequences, in which base pairs or amino acids are 
represented using single-letter codes. A sequence in FASTA format begins with a single-line description, followed by lines of sequence data. 
The description line is distinguished from the sequence data by a greater-than (">") symbol in the first column. It is recommended that all 
lines of text be shorter than 80 characters in length.

## MPEG-G:
Further compressed version of CRAM and therefore able to contain even more informations



