## Terminal and Unix Report

#### *1. Why do we use the terminal in bioinformatics?*

The terminal can be used to look at and work with text files. For example, with some commands new folders and files can be made, data from URL links can be saved as well as copied to new files. The terminal code can extract and save specific parts of the data, as needed. Amongst other things, the terminal can display the entire data from a text file or only specific things like the number of lines and other information. The terminal can also be used to change the format of a file.

#### *2. What is a plain text file?*

It is a document that can be used to write and display only text. These text files usually have a defined structure according to their format (e.g. SAM, FASTA, FASTQ or BED).


#### *3. In bioinformatics, most of the data are stored in plain text files with added syntax/structure (and commonly compressed afterwards). For instance, fasta or fastq files we have discussed them today, but also SAM, BED, GTF, VCF and others (to be discussed next week). Why is that?*

When working with genome sequences, usually a lot of data is generated which needs to be stored, processed and analysed. The plain text files provide an accessible way to store the data, as they use up less space and at the same time they can still be visualised, worked with and understood.

#### *4. How can we list files are in a directory? Please provide the command(s).*

```javascript
cd ~/course/data
ls 
```
The command **ls** will return all the names of the files that are in the folder data, while
```javascript
ls -l
```
shows the long listing format of the files in data, with the access rights.

#### *5. What | and > do in a terminal?*

The **|** symbol is called a “pipe” and it can be written in between commands in order to pass the output from one command to the other without having to save the extracted data in between or creating new files.

```javascript
awk 'NR % 2 == 0' ~/course/data/example.bed | wc -l
```
The example indicates how to use the **|** symbol to pass the data from the first command to the second one. First of all, every second line is extracted from the example.bed file and then the number of lines is counted.

The **>** symbol is used when the data is saved from a text file to another one or from an URL link into a text file. 
For example:
```javascript
curl -L https://raw.githubusercontent.com/compbiozurich/UZH-BIO392/imallona/course-material/2020/imallona/examples/SP1.fq  
  > SP1.fq
```

#### *6. How do we print the last 10 lines of the file named /mnt/test/test.txt? Please provide the command(s).*

```javascript
tail -10 ~/mnt/test/test.txt
```


#### *7. How do we print the first column of the file named /mnt/test/test.txt whose columns are separatedby tabs? Please provide the command(s).*

```javascript
awk '{print $1}' ~/mnt/test/test.txt 
```

#### *8. How can we print every third line of a text file? Please provide the command(s), and discuss what they do.*
```javascript
awk 'NR % 3 == 0' ~/ mnt/test/test.txt 
```
This command will print every line for which the condition NR % 3 == 0 is true. The first part of the command (NR % 3) calculates the remainder of the NR and 3 division. If the remainder is equal to 0, then the second part of the command (== 0) is true and the line from the text file is printed. 

#### *9. How can we transform FASTQ into FASTA files using standard Unix tools (sed, awk, etc)? Please provide the command(s), and discuss what they do.*

The FASTQ file format has four lines to describe one sequence, while the FASTA format has only two. 

The FASTQ file format [[1]]:
  1. Is the sequence identifier, which begins with the **@** symbol
  2. The sequence
  3. A separator (which is a line that only has the **+** symbol)
  4. The quality scores 

The FASTA file format [[2]]: 
  1. The description line, which starts with the **>** symbol
  2. The sequence 

The convertion of a FASTQ file to a FASTA format requires the extraction of the sequence identifier and the nucleotide sequence, which are the first two lines.

```javascript
awk 'NR % 4 == 1 {print ">"$1}; NR % 4 == 2 {print}' ~/course/data/example.fq > ~/course/data/example.fa
```
 * The command **NR % 4 == 1** will save only the lines, for which the line number (NR) divided by 4 has 1 as remainder. The **%** symbol means modulo.
 * **{print ">"$1}** will write the **>** symbol in front of the first column of the line saved by the **NR % 4 == 1** command. This will print the **>** symbol in front of the sequence identifier, as it is required by the FASTA file format. 
 * **NR % 4 == 2 {print}** is used to save only the lines, for which the line number (NR) divided by 4 has 2 as remainder. The command **{print}** will save every line for which the previous command is true.
 * The **;** symbol stands for **or**, which means that the command is executed if the first part ('NR % 4 == 1 {print ">"$1}) **or** the second part (NR % 4 ==2) is true. In this case, both lines are printed.
 * The **>** symbol is used to save the extracted data at the same directory in a new file called example.fa **/course/data/example.fa**.


[1]: https://support.illumina.com/bulletins/2016/04/fastq-files-explained.html
[2]: https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/FASTA/
