# questions on 'A copy number variation map of the human genome' [^1]
  [^1]: https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg3871

1. Why is important to construct a CNV map on healthy individuals of various ethnicities?
   
   Because it can aid the interpretation of new CNV findings for clinical and research applications. CNVs sometimes
   have no phenotypic effect, but some can account for adaptive traits or underlie disease.

2. What is the CNV size that the authors defined? (Box 1 mentioned in introduction)
   Noted: The CNV size definition is still under debate and may be different in other literature
   
   They defined the size to be at least 50 bp that differ in copy number based on the comparison of two or more genomes.
   
3. What are the primary approaches used for CNV detection? And what are the advantages
   and limitations of these technologies? (CNV discoveries)
   
   - Microarrays: Suitable for studying quantitative variants. May miss smaller variants. Have limited resolution capacity.. Are more likely to detect duplications.
   - NGS: Call smaller variants and are biased towards detections of deletions. Have high sensititvity and the ability
     to provide accurate sequence-level breakpoint resolution.
   
4. The authors used clustering method to combine data from different studies into merged
   CNVRs (Copy number variable regions). What are the two criteria for cluster filtering? And
   why did they do this filtering? (The CNV map)

   Every possible variant pair need at least 50% reciprocal overlap. 
   Clusters were then filtered on the basis of the number of distinct subjects that carry the variant and the     number of distinct studies with at least one variant in the cluster. 
   They used it because the filter based on the number of subjects excluded singletons, and variants that are supported by a larger number of subjects are less likely to be false positives. 
   The filter based on the number of studies ensured the exclu- sion of potential study-specific artefacts.
   
5. What are thresholds in stringency level 1, inclusive map (stringency level 2), and stringent
   map (stringency level 12) respectively? (The CNV map)

   - level 1: supported by at least one subject and one study for each variant
   - level 2: at least two subjects and one study for each variant
   - level 12: at least two subjects and two studies for each variant

6. Which percentage of the genome contributes to CNV in inclusive map and stringent map
   respectively? (Properties of the CNV map)
   
   - Inclusive map: 9.5% for all variants
   - Stringent map: 4.8% for all variants
   
7. By your intuition, which kind of genes are more variable between protein-coding genes and
   non-coding genes? How about their findings in this paper? (Functional impact of CNV)
   
   I'd say non-coding genes are more variable.
   Study: 'The exons of non-coding genes had the highest proportion of copy number 
   variable sequence, which is higher than the exons of protein-coding genes. By contrast, exons of many of 
   the constrained gene sets — particularly those associated with diseases (OMIM, ISCA and cancer) or other 
   fitness-altering phenotypes — were less variable than the genome average.'
   
8. The authors generated a null CNV map and found genes for which at least 85% of the
   exons were homozygous deleted. What are the functions of these genes? And why did the
   authors say that they seem to be non-essential? (Homozygous deleted genes)

   They seem to be non-essential genes, as the individuals lacking them still seem to be healthy. 
   Their function may be redundant or they could be related to late-onset phenotypic consequences that don't
   substantially reduce the fitness. 

9. If you are a medical doctor, how do you use this map as a tool to assess the clinical
   importance of a CNV? (Clinical application of the CNV map part in Discussion) 
   
   This map is useful as a tool in the investigation of CNVs for medical applications. To assess the clinical    importance of a CNV found in a case subject, the criteria could include: 
   - whether it is found among the CNVRs of the CNV  map 
   - whether it overlaps with medically relevant genes. 
   
   There are no solid boundaries between what we recognize as traits and diseases, nor between variants that are      classified as benign or neutral and variants that are classified as predisposing risk factors or disease- related. Genomic background, including ethnicity, can influence the thresholds.
