The generation of genomic data has become increasingly important in various fields such as healthcare, research, and personal genetics. Not only comes this data from functional genomics 
obtained by next-generation sequencing (NGS) which increased greatly in the past decade but also from the commercial databases that gather DNA data from at-home tests, which aim to 
find out genetic ancestry, disease predisposition, or inherited traits. While broad sharing of NGS data is essential for research advancement it poses privacy challenges, with the commercial 
database representing an even more substantial risk.

What I always find promising about genomic data is its use for personalized medicine. Such data can be used to tailor medical treatments and interventions to an individual's unique genetic makeup leading to more effective and targeted healthcare. Such targeted healthcare can minimize adverse effects and increase the treatment efficacy. Moreover, genomic data has significantly advanced scientific research. Analyzing genomic data leads to a better understanding of genetic contributions to diseases and traits thus allowing for new drug development. Gene therapies are currently one of the largest healthcare areas[^1]. 

Another aspect that I found has a huge potential is disease risk prediction. By identifying genetic markers associated with various diseases we can predict many lethal diseases and implement preventive measures on time. However, I never realized that genetic tests illuminating the risk of disease may lead to such inequalities in the health insurance policy[^2]. I find it very mean that people in the US who already know about their risk are not entitled to get more frequent follow-up care or that costs of genetic testing are covered for only a small subset of patients with high-risk mutations. Many people prefer to avoid these genetic tests out of fear that a positive test could increase health costs which I can highly understand. This is, however, a strong discrimination in my opinion. Even worse is stealing our private data by health insurance companies to decide who they want to insure and who not. As an additional point, the discovery of genetic predisposition might pose psychological risks. Knowledge about the specific mutations leading to the incurable disease might cause emotional distress and anxiety. Thus, one should consider different aspects before performing such a genetic screening.

After having a closer look at different case studies I would not perform a commercial DNA test to find out my relatives, my genetic susceptibility for different cancer types, or my physical capabilities. By submitting such a test we immediately lose our privacy and our valuable data. Our data is used much further not only to identify missing persons and human remains but also to identify suspects in investigations[^3]. It is sometimes enough to investigate how much the DNA recovered at a crime scene matches that of other users to be able to identify the suspect. It means that by publishing our genomic data we also expose the data of our relatives which might be against their will. What I find particularly dangerous is the fact that even people who have never committed a crime could be questioned due to the shared portion of DNA with a suspect.

To conclude, genomic databases are highly informative and sensitive. I think that the genomic data should be of course further used for research purposes, but strong safety measures should be applied to protect our privacy and avoid data leakage. While research purposes might be very beneficial for our health, I would be very cautious with any commercial DNA tests which are by far misused in ways that we might not even think of. 




[^1]: https://lifesciencesintelligence.com/features/five-ways-that-genetic-research-and-advancements-inform-healthcare
[^2]: https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/26/opinion/genetic-risks-cancer.html
[^3]: https://www.wired.com/story/dna-drives-help-identify-missing-people-its-a-privacy-nightmare/
