The use of genome data for healthcare or lifestyle purposes contains many concurring aspects. Personally, I have never used the DIY kits for at home, because I do not trust these companies that offer this service for “non-medical” purposes. First, it’s just money thrown out of the window, like any other fancy and unnecessary gadget, that the free market tries to create a need in us. Second, it supports a nationalistic and racist way of thinking. What is 10 % Swiss DNA or ancestry, what is 100 % Swiss DNA? Can any person be 100 % Swiss? Aren’t we all in the end descendants from one valley in Eastern Africa? When did the people migrating to Europe become 100 % European?  

Another problematic aspect is the one of genomics as a major part of “informational capitalism”. Companies are always looking for more resources they can exploit. After having depleted a large part of the natural resources of our planet, they turn to the next source of their money generating business: humans. With the rise of smartphones, messengers and social media our digital footprint of personal data that we leave behind in the world wide web is all that companies need to keep the wheels of capitalism turning. In exchange for the “free” use of their applications, the users pay with their personal data. This is further used for personalizing advertisement and making even more money. Genome data is the next step in this process. When going into a transaction with an ancestry or lifestyle genome database, we give them access to another aspect of our individuality. Our genomic data is no longer a gift to science, when major companies make money off it.  

This leads us to the political and structural aspect of genomic healthcare data. We need to ask ourselves what and especially whom are we supporting and financing when we have initiatives such as personalized medicine. Who is making decisions on funding and who is benefitting from these decisions? How can it be that we are investing billions into high-tech buildings, labs, machines and servers to make medicine even more precise for the top few percent of the population. While just a few roads further down, people are struggling and cannot pay the rent, yet alone health insurance? We need to come away from the glorification of technology and Disneyfication of health. How much of this do we really need and how much of it is just another fancy gadget to further optimize our lives and bodies in the race against each other to the top? 

And the last point I want to make is the replacement of humans by algorithms. More and more computers make decisions regarding our health. All of this is in the name of objectivity. “A machine will not be discriminating”. This is not true; the machine will be as discriminating as the human that programmed it. We cannot give up thinking for ourselves, especially when it is in the realm of medicine and health, when the decisions affect other human beings.  

 

Reference: Reardon J. Why and How Bioethics Must Turn toward Justice: A Modest Proposal. Hastings Cent Rep. 2020 May;50 Suppl 1:S70-S76. doi: 10.1002/hast.1158. PMID: 32597526. 

 
