
When asked if I would ever be interested in analysing my DNA to better understand my family’s background, the answer is usually no. First, I’m not particularly interested in knowing the percentages of my geographical origin, second, I’m pretty sure that the outcome would be mostly central European. Even if there would be any surprises, I have no connection to any other culture than the one I grew up with and in no way shape or form I could feel connected to another culture the way I do with that one. This doesn’t mean I cannot understand why other people would like to do it. 

I would consider undergoing genetic analysis for the assessment of a disease risk, particularly if there exists a familial history of hereditary conditions and I do understand the importance of genomic databases for research. Therefor with the necessary information on how my genomic data is stored and protected I would consider making it available for research. One possibility could be data cooperatives as seen in “Democratizing Health Research Through Data Cooperatives, Alessandro Blasimme & Effy Vayena & Ernst Hafen, Philos. Technol. (2018) 31:473–479 https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-018-0320-8“. 

Making genomic information with possible or known links to disease available for a broad scientific spectrum could advance health care. Sharing this data in data cooperatives could lead to a better understanding of risk factors and diseases. It could help the underrepresentation of minorities in health research databases and therefor lower the bias in their treatment (see for example Guerrero, S., López-Cortés, A., Indacochea, A. et al. Analysis of Racial/Ethnic Representation in Select Basic and Applied Cancer Research Studies. Sci Rep 8, 13978 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32264-x). Data cooperatives such as MIDATA could facilitate the access to genomic information by different institutions, as well as the introduction of similar cooperatives in other countries. An international cooperation in sharing of genomic data would lead to an increase of data available to different research teams in different countries, as well as in the heterology of genomic data. Globalizing genomic data could cause administrative problems as the legal situation is not the same in every country.

One important aspect is the anonymization of the genomic information and the right to know what is happening with one’s data. With data cooperatives as non-profit organizations, there is no risk of data being sold to insurance companies, which could lead to higher insurance fees. Additionally, even if the insurance companies would know about a higher risk for a certain disease – for example breast cancer - they are not obligated to cover the needed health measures such as early screenings (see Genetic Risks for Cancer Should Not Mean Financial Hardship, Nov. 26, 2021, Leah Pierson and Emma Pierson). This implies that there is no benefit for an individual if their insurer knows their genomic information. However, a non-profit organization relies heavily on funding, which in this case can only be achieved by the help of policy makers. Even with anonymized data or never giving up a DNA sample it is possible to identify an individual based on relatives that did take part in a genomic study. This can be and is used by Law enforcement to identify suspects and portray Identikit pictures (see Cops Might Already Have Your DNA, Without Your Consent, The Daily Beast, Published Nov. 14, 2022 4:51AM ET, Albert Fox Cahn & Ayesha Rasheed). The protection of genomic data is therefor still a challenge and has yet to be solved. 

In conclusion, it can be said that handling genomic data is still very complicated and not easily done. Research teams around the world should work together to find a solution, so that they can advance health care. Losing anonymity and privacy is prevalent when talking about genomic data bases. This is the main reason why I am not yet willing to participate in genetic testing for health or ancestry. 

