## Some Comments about Genome Resources

I read the article on the development of costs and the question, how these costs can be calculated. It's interesting that even this is subject to some kind of interpretation and speculation, because the question is which costs are being "counted" and which aren't. So in the first Human Genome Project, there was e.g. the problem of mapping, and these costs often weren't included in the costs the "reference" genome in the end had cost. But one could see that this was obviously a huge part of the funding, and in the end, funding was around **3 billion** . Obviosuly the cost has come down a lot; also, when the Human Genome Project was finished, the costs were already down quite a lot. Still in the area of millions though. But nowadays it became so cheap to sequence a genome. Interestingly, still today the sequence of only the Exons (an exome) is more expensive than sequencing the whole genome. This is because it is,from a labor point of view, more demanding and lab equipment is more expensive. So when we thing that the Exome is only 1.5% of the whole genome, it is wrong to think then that the sequencing of the Exome would cost only 1.5% of what the whole genome would cost.

I looked also at the genome data banks, e.g. of [international genome](https://www.internationalgenome.org/) or the [NIH](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/gdv/browser/genome/?id=GCF_000001405.39). It can seem very confusing at first, but actually it allows for good researching, depending on what one wants to find out. With internal genome, one can browse for specific individuals from specific geographic regions. One can really browse the map, select a place and find genomes of people who live there. One can then download certain sequences. So here it's more about a whole genome. With the NIH database, one can browse according to chromosomes, for example. There is lots of information regarding known variations in the genome. One can also see specific alleles, so it's very detailled. Each allele is marked and has a certain "location". 

On [ensembl](https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Compara_Tree?g=ENSG00000139618;r=13:32315086-32400268) I found also "gene trees", in this case for the BRCA2 gene. One can in which line of ancestry this gene, or some variations thereof, previously appeared. So for example in the case of the Gorilla, one sees that the gene seems to be almost identical to the one found in human. This is a big reason why today, when we talk about "species" or "ancestry" we rely a lot on these gene symmetries, gene similarities. There are other examples, [Cosmic](https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic) provides mostly information about mutations in cancer related genes. They recently celebrated their 10'millionth mutation that they have curated.

