**Genomic Data: Risks and Opportunities**

Genomic data, when combined with biochemical and health information, presents transformative potential for the field of medicine and specifically, personalized medicine. The use of genomic data allows researchers to delve deeper into understanding the interplay of genetics in health and disease and fosters the progression of personalized medicine. Organizations like the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) aspire to enable responsible genomic data sharing without violating human rights. An example of a platform that tries to achieve such responsible use of genomic data is Beacon, a feature from the Progenetix database. It is designed to provide insight into whether specific genetic variants have appeared in other patients, without actually using the patient’s genomic data. Yet, there have been some privacy security issues when querying for thousands of specific SNV occurrences in a genomic data pool leading to identify individuals in an anonymized genomic data collection. Rare allelic variants can be used to identify an individual (or their relatives) in a genome collection without accessing the individual datasets directly. However, with the introduction of Progenetix Beacon v2 API, a new proposal opens the way for the design of a simple but powerful "genomics API".

Direct-to-consumer genomic testing platforms, such as 23andme and myheritage, bring forth their own set of challenges. Their prognostics often are misinterpreted by consumers, given that the genetic information is usually non-deterministic and embodies minimal absolute risk. My personal inclination towards sharing my genomic data is one of hesitation. While my sister's experience with 23andme provided intriguing insights into our ancestry, I struggle with the idea of giving away my genomic data to a private entity merely for such knowledge.

Another facet of how genomic data use can be beneficial, is the use of DNA in law enforcement, where the availability of a relative's DNA can aid in criminal identification. But how is the genomic data use regulated today? In Switzerland, the Data Protection Act 2021 categorizes genetic data as inherently sensitive, necessitating protection. Yet, there is no coherent approach on ownership of data as such. In the field of research this leads mostly to a data ownership by the research institution.
Potential risks of genomic data include the vulnerability to cyber attacks or the misuse of personal information where insurers might deny coverage upon discovering genetic predispositions. [^1] The article I have chosen reflects this issue.

The article titled "Genetic Risks for Cancer Should Not Mean Financial Hardship" published on November 26th, 2021, raises significant concerns over the financial consequences of possessing high-risk genetic mutations. Insurers often shirk from covering the necessary follow-up care for many such individuals. This is not only detrimental for patients but also financially inefficient for the healthcare. It is cost-effective to screen for potential cancers early rather than bear the exorbitant charges associated with advanced-stage treatments like chemotherapy. Moreover, the fear of increased personal healthcare costs deters many from undergoing essential genetic testing.[^2] The authors of the article think it is imperative that healthcare insurance evolves coherently with scientific advancements, and the federal government mandates insurers to facilitate screenings for genetically at-risk individuals without imposing any costs. As for my personal stance, the prospects of genomic data in research are undoubtedly promising. It could redefine our understanding of the role of genetics in health and illnesses. However, there's an urgent need for robust guidelines conserving privacy and human rights. At the moment, there is differing regulatory landscapes across countries. In my opinion a global regulation seems necessary to plug any loopholes. 

[^1]: Lecture Slides: Genomic Data and Privacy. Michael Baudis.
[^2]: Genetic Risks for Cancer Should Not Mean Financial Hardship, New York Times, 26.11.2021.
