While moving though the internet one sees many advertisements for commercial genetic tests, particularly around holidays. At first, I was very interested in such a service, not as much for the health data but more for the possibility of discovering more about my ancestry. Coming from a family where little written ancestry data exists, this promise was very alluring. Due to the lacking infrastructure in the region my parents and grandparents grew up in, most information was lost when my grandparents passed away. Teenage-me, however, didn’t have the financial means to get such a test done and looking back now, I’m grateful that that was the case. 

Back then I didn’t understand what happened behind the scenes and, honestly, I didn’t care much either. It wasn’t until these tests were discussed back in biology class in high school and then again more in depth in bioinformatics class in college that I understood the impact of the risks. Not only are most of the results of health-related factors meaningless to the average person but also, the ancestry testing is vastly underdeveloped and imprecise. While the later can be improved over time with more customer samples and data, the former only risks causing panic and unnecessary testing and treatment for something that wasn’t an issue to begin with. It has to be said that some statistics are obviously only supposed to be fun to look at and have no medical value, like how likely you are to be more sensitive to bitterness compared to the general population. In this case I suppose the testing can be condoned, but, in my opinion, medically relevant results should be left to be done by a medical professional.

Now, genetic testing for medical purposes, I believe, is highly necessary in some cases and thus should also be performed. We are still on the way to understand many diseases and without enough DNA samples, particularly of rarer diseases, this can’t be done. So, not only are these tests necessary for the common knowledge but also for the individual. Sometimes knowing the precise genetic makeup of a patient is necessary to diagnose or know the specific treatment needed. There is a major problem with this, however, and that is data privacy. 

For optimal research science needs optimal data sharing. Sadly, this data can include very personal information. If it isn’t anonymized and randomized properly, this information can be found out if you know how to look for it. Albeit, you’d need to know somebody’s DNA sequence but once you have it you could access delicate metadata. Restricting access to genetic databases would be detrimental to research, however. One would need to background check every applicant and grant them access individually which takes time and could be expensive. This undoes what an open database tries to accomplish: public access. In this case we would have to choose the lesser evil, which, in my opinion, would be to leave the databases being open access. Implementing better anonymization and randomization protocols might be an option but the risk of data being used in unwished ways is still possible. 

Forensic use is one of the ways it can be used. Learning that genetic data from family members aided enforcers to identify a killer was very impactful. As described in the article ‘Genealogy Sites Have Helped Identify Suspects. Now They’ve Helped Convict One’ by The New York Times it is now very well possible to find a person over the genetic data of relatives that was submitted to a commercial testing company. Back when this happened, this kind of use of genetic databases was not really bound to legal terms and most people who had participated in the tests were not even aware that this was possible. Since then, many countries have developed concrete laws to control the use of such data for forensic and medical uses, which I believe is very necessary and important, but the ease with which these things can happen is still alarming and has definitely discouraged me from giving commercial companies my data. 

In summary, I wouldn’t take a commercial genetic test anymore. The benefit of learning non-life-altering information is not high enough to overshadow the risks and problems they show. For precise medical reasons, however, I would. Since this isn’t completely harmless, I’d still be a bit hesitant but it would be for the good of not only me but potentially also others, so I would take the risk. 
