### Activity 04/10/19 - Lars & Sabrina

## Foxp2 lab

### Find out what Foxp2 does.

Foxp2 codes for the protein _Forkhead box protein P2_. This protein is a Zinc-binding transcriptional repressor that is involved in neural mechanisms mediating the development of speech and language. 

Notable structural motifs are a C2H2-type Zinc finger and a DNA binding fork-head.

The protein may play a role in the specification and differentiation of lung epithelium. It may also be involved in developing neural, gastrointestinal and cardiovascular tissues. It also contributes to the modification of synapse formation via the regulation of SRPX2 levels. It can synergise with CTBP1 to repress transcription, though CTPBP1 is not essential for it to function. 


### Which biological process does it participate in?

There are 22 GO terms for biological processes associated with Foxp2, 16 of which are also listed on its UniProt entry:
* Development of the camera-type eye, caudate nucleus, cerebellum, cerebral cortex, lung alveolus, putamen, skeletal muscle tissue and smooth muscle tissue, as well as some post-embryonic development
* Innate vocalization behavior and vocal learning
* DNA-templated negative regulation of transcription
* Positive regulation of epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis and  mesenchymal cell proliferation
* Response to testosterone
* Righting reflex


### Which reaction does it catalyse?

Foxp2 does not have a catalytic function. It functions as a transcriptional repressor.


### What does RefSeq stand for and what does it mean?

RefSeq is short for Reference Sequence. Each variant in the database has a unique RefSeq, so it can function as an ID.

The RefSeq collection provides a comprehensive, integrated, non-redundant, well-annotated set of sequences, including genomic DNA, transcripts, and proteins. RefSeq genomes are copies of selected assembled genomes available in GenBank. RefSeq transcript and protein records are generated by several methods.

RefSeq sequences form a foundation for medical, functional, and diversity studies. They provide a stable reference for genome annotation, gene identification and characterization, mutation and polymorphism analysis (especially RefSeqGene records), expression studies, and comparative analyses.


### Human Foxp2 (Isomorph 1):

NCBI Reference Sequence: NP_055306.1

Provided FASTA sequence: _FOXP2_protein_human.fa_


### Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) Foxp2:

NCBI Reference Sequence: NP_001009020.1

Provided FASTA sequence: _FOXP2_protein_chimp.fa_


### BLAST alignment:

We set human as query and chimpanzee as subject.

Maximum score: 1431
Total query length: 715
Query coverage: 100%
Lengths of the alignments: 716
Number of matches: 1
Percent identity: 99.58% (713/716)
Percent positives: 99% (714/716)
Percent gaps: 0% (1/716)
E-value: 0.0


### Dot matrix view:

Provided: _query_dot_matrix.png_
The dot matrix view shows regions of similarity based upon the BLAST results.
The query sequence (human) is represented on the X-axis, the subject sequence (chimpanzee) on the Y-axis. Numbers represent the residues of the query. Each alignment is shown as a (bottom-left to top-right) line. Our query produced 1 alignment match.


### Where is Foxp2 located in the cell?

In the nucleus; specifically nuclear chromatin.


### Which diseases is it involved in? How?

Natural variant _VAR_012278_ (553 R → H) leads to reduced interaction with the transcriptional repressor T-box brain protein 1 (TBR1). This leads to Speech-language disorder 1 (SPCH1), a disorder characterized by severe orofacial dyspraxia resulting in largely incomprehensible speech.


### Cat (Felis catus) Foxp2 sequence:

NCBI Reference Sequence: NP_001106648.1

FASTA sequence: _FOXP2_protein_cat.fa_


### BLAST alignment human/cat:

We set human as query and cat as subject.

Penalties 11, 1: Maximum score 1396
Penalties 8, 2: Maximum score 1379
Penalties 7, 2: Maximum score 948


### Use the default values in BLAST for gap open and gap extension penalties.

Default gap open and gap extension values: 11, 1

Maximum score: 1396
Total query length: 715
Query coverage: 100%
Lengths of the alignments: 707
Number of matches: 1
Percent identity: 97.90% (700/715)
Percent positives: 97% (700/715)
Percent gaps: 1% (8/715)
E-value: 0.0


### 10 Foxp2 phylogenetic tree for multiple sequence alignment

We used
* NP_055306.1 - forkhead box protein P2 isoform I [Homo sapiens]

as a "basis" and aligned the following 10 sequences to it:
* NP_001009020.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Pan troglodytes]
* NP_001028193.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Macaca mulatta]
* NP_001266466.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Gorilla gorilla]
* NP_444472.2 - forkhead box protein P2 isoform 1 [Mus musculus]
* NP_001162393.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Papio anubis]
* AFN11569.1 - FOXP2 [Eospalax fontanierii baileyi]
* XP_021019982.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Mus caroli]
* XP_021400917.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Lonchura striata domestica]
* XP_021089156.1 - forkhead box protein P2 [Mesocricetus auratus]
* OWK61048.1 - Forkhead box protein P2 [Lonchura striata domestica] 

Phylogenetic tree: _multiple_alignment_tree.png_


### "A recent evolutionary change affects a regulatory element in the human FOXP2 gene" → Explain this paper and its main contribution to science.

The FOXP2 gene is required for normal development of speech and language, and its expression is  observably different in modern humans compared to other species, owing largely to a recent selective sweep. However, it is still largely unclear which changes in FOXP2 or its regulators are actually responsible for the changes. This study sequenced FOXP2 genomic DNA fragments from present-day humans and a one Neandertal in order to uncover differences in FOXP2 nucleotide variants between them.

One substitution in intron 8 affects the binding of the highly conserved CNS transcription factor POU3F2. It is the only nucleotide variant in that region where the majority of present-day people carry a derived variant not found in Neandertals and Denisovans. The variant functions differently from the the ancestral one, which is likely to result in changes in the regulation of FOXP2 specifically in postmitotic neurons, where both FOXP2 and POU3F2 are co-expressed.

Given the results found in this study, this substitution is likely to have been one important change in the evolution of modern language. However, other work has also uncovered functionally relevant substitutions in FOXP2 which are shared between modern and archaic humans.


### "Humanized Foxp2 accelerates learning by enhancing transitions from declarative to procedural performance" → Explain this paper.

The speech behaviour that is unique to humans is not well understood yet.

Two human-specific amino acid substitutions were inserted into the endogenous FOXP2 of mice. Tests with this FOXP2 mice (hum/ hum) showed that those mice were better in declarative and procedural forms of learning than their littermates.

To conclude, there is strong evidence that the amino acid substitutions contribute to adapting the human brain for speech and language acquisition.
