{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww19260\viewh15040\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa321\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Impact of genetic variation on three dimensional structure and function of proteins
\f1\b0\fs32 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\sa320\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is the biological question? \
Systematic and qualitative analysis of proteins for which 3D structures of genetic variant proteins have been determined. To understand the relationship between point mutations and observed variants in 3D.\
What is the method? \
	Find protein structures with non-synonymous SNVs where the amino acid sequence observed experimentally (obtained from PDB) is not identical to the sequence provided by UniProt.\uc0\u8232 \
What significant scientific contribution does the paper make? \
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\sl360\sa320\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Detailed analysis of protein variations that cause disease by affecting either Activity, Aggregation, Stability, Binding, Aggregation or Rearrangement of the protein.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa321\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Mutational landscape of metastatic cancer revealed from prospective clinical sequencing of 10,000 patients\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\sl360\sa320\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 What is the biological question? \
What are clinically relevant somatic mutations in common and rare metastatic cancer types? Which alterations in genes can be therapeutically targeted?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
What is the method? \
Collect tissue samples from tumors of 11369 individuals and look for somatic mutations by comparing the sequencing sample with a sample from the blood (normal DNA). \
Perform MSK-IMPACT (a hybridization capture\'96based NGS panel that is capable of detecting all protein-coding mutations, copy number alterations (CNAs), and selected promoter mutations and structural rearrangements in 410 cancer-associated genes)\
\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\sl360\sa320\partightenfactor0
\cf2 What significant scientific contribution does the paper make? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Reveal clinical actionability of somatic alterations in different types of tumors (BRAF-targeted therapy). Allows sequencing of tumors in patients (that were heavily treated beforehand) and interpretation/utilisation of the results for treatment based on genotype.\
\
The breadth and depth of MSK-IMPACT and the analysis of matched normal DNA allowed us to detect important genomic alterations that would have been missed by other approaches
\f0\b \

\f1\b0 We found that many genes that were originally identified as significant in TCGA studies were even more frequently mutated in the MSK-IMPACT cohort. \
The MSK-IMPACT results thus provide, to our knowledge, the largest analysis of somatic mutations in the 
\f2\i TERT
\f1\i0  promoter across all tumor types reported to date. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
novel recurrent fusion gene, 
\f2\i CDK5RAP2
\f1\i0 -
\f2\i BRAF
\f1\i0 , which was detected in two independent melanomas lacking other clear driver mutations \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\sa320\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
How many entries are there for this protein? \uc0\u8232 13\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Which method(s) were used in characterization of the structure? For the most recent entry with a publication record: \uc0\u8232 
\fs24 3.2
\f3 \uc0\u8201 
\f1 \'c5 resolution cryo-electron microscopy structure of the Frataxin-bound active human complex
\fs28 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
{\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is the structure determination method? \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is the Uniprot ID? \uc0\u8232 Q16595\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
How many chains does it have? \uc0\u8232 1 chain \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	6.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is the sequence length? \uc0\u8232 129 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	7.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Which ligands (if any) are present? \uc0\u8232 Mg2+\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	8.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Examine the 3D structure using 3D view. Color by chain. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	9.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Play with all of the options and prepare a structure figure. \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \
\
}