{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 ArialUnicodeMS;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww24840\viewh25460\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa321\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Impact of genetic variation on three dimensional structure and function of proteins
\f1\fs48 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 \outl0\strokewidth0 What is the biological question ? \ulnone \
\
How strongly do identified SNV correlate with the 3D structure of a Protein and how can that be used to predict phenotypes and disease states? \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul \ulc0 What is the method? \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Unique 3D protein structures were taken from the PDB which were used to map non-synonymous SNVs. Furthermore, these structures had to have identical information about the mutation in dbSNP and in PDB. \
First of all they mapped the variants to the 3D structure position of the protein by using BioJAva. After that the different occuring SNV were categorised in secondary structures (alpha-helixes, beta-sheet or turns) and type of  changes (e.g. activity, aggregation etc.) . Also it was determined how big the effect of the variants are. Meaning how frequent the SNV occurs in a population. For that the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) Exome Variant server has been used. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \outl0\strokewidth0 Concluding, 374 unique human SNVs were taken which posses a changed amino acid and have 3D coordinates available on PDB. \cf2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \ul \ulc0 What significant scientific contribution does the paper make? \ulnone \
\
Deeper understanding of point mutations and their effect on experimentally observed 3D protein structures.\
The paper showed that the range of possible SNV effects at the protein level are significantly greater than currently assumed by existing software prediction methods, and that correct prediction of consequences remains a significant challenge.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa321\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Mutational landscape of metastatic cancer revealed from prospective clinical sequencing of 10,000 patients
\f1\fs48 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 \outl0\strokewidth0 What is the biological question ? \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
How can the usage of a genomic assay such as MSK-IMPACT contribute to identify mutation relevant to cancer therapy?\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\ul What is the method?\ulnone  \
\
First of all they collected blood samples from over 10\'92000 patients for DNA sequencing. Through MSK-IMPACT 341/410 genes were sequenced via NGS creating a sequence library for the hybridization process which enabled the identification of somatic and germ-lines mutations by bioinformatic tools. \
Further analysis were made with comparing the dataset with TCGA and OncoKB creating an in-house genomic variant database (MPATH), where they were reviewed manually for quality and accuracy.  Genomic alliterations were uploaded to a database called Darwin for automated clinical trial matching and uploaded to cBioPortal for data mining and interpretation. \
\
\ul What significant scientific contribution does the paper make? \ulnone \
\
They \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 successfully sequenced 10,945 tumor samples from 10,336 patients ,creating a \cf2 \outl0\strokewidth0 comprehensive and unique genomic data set of patients with metastatic cancer.\cf2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
Using the data they were able to identify somatic mutations, novel noncoding alterations, and mutational signatures that were shared by common and rare tutor types. \
Another notable fact is that out of 5009 patients tested by MSK-IMPACT before Juli 2015 11% were able to enrol for a genomically matched clinical trial which is based on genomic alteration match the drug target.  \
\

\f0\b\fs36 HSOD report
\f2\b0\fs28 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 HSOD (Gene: SOD1) Ala\uc0\u8594 Val (A4V) (rs121912442) leading to Aggregation (familial ALS)\
PDB: 1N19\
\
Searching for HSOD on PDB, we find 13 entries overall. \
12 of those had their structure characterized using X-Ray Diffraction, one with Solution NMR.\
\
The 1N19 (HSOD A4V mt) structure was determined using X-Ray Diffraction.\
\
The UniProt ID of HSOD is P00441\
\
1N19 has one unique protein chain and as it\'92s a homo dimer, it has two chains. Its sequence counts 308 residues. It has 3 unique Ligands: Zinc Ion, Sulfate Ion, Copper (1) Ion. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
}