# Estimate Storage Requirements for 1000 Genomes

#### WES & WGS 
Whole genome sequencing - WGS - and whole exome sequencing - WES - are two of the most popular methods used in genetic research. WGS sequences the entire genome, so it includes protein-coding and non-protein-coding regions. Therefore, allmost all changes in the DNA can be identified. WES only sequences the protein - coding regions. It is cheaper, since the ampunt of data generated is sigcnificantly less then with WGS. The majority of diease-causing variants are in the exome, therefore  WES is quite a powerful tool to identify genetic causes for disease. However, WGS provides a more compreensive picture of other variants. Especially rare and novel variants might be missed with WES (see [source] (https://www.novogene.com/eu-en/resources/blog/wgs-vs-wes-which-genetic-sequencing-method-is-right-for-you/)). 

#### Diﬀerent file formats
- SAM: SAM stands for Sequence Alignment/Map format. It is a TAB-delimited text format and consists of a header section and an alignment section. Each alignment line has 11 mandatory fields for essential alignment information, like apping position and variable number of optional fields for flexible or aligner specific information. (https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf)
- 
- BAM: A BAM file is a binary generated by aligning the FASTQ files to the reference genome. BAM is still considered raw DNA data. Unlike FASTQs and VCFs, BAMs are never compressed. (https://sequencing.com/blog/post/how-to-use-genome-sequencing-data-files?srsltid=AfmBOoruDw06mqG3gA6ZeGDVD1iKh_GbANS-xaH4pMbXTlRU2ZQP76wb&utm_source=chatgpt.com)
- 
- VCF: The VCF Variant Call Format is an example for a widely used file format with "built-in logic". It provids "logic
compression" for genomic annotations which rely on the notion of "assessed variant in a population". It is complex to interpret, but there is no replacement in sight (but new versions) (see BIO 390, lecture 1).

- FASTA: FASTA is a a text-based format used for representing nucleotide or protein/amino acid sequences. It can store multiple sequence recors and each record begins with a single-line description ('header line'). It includes the ">" symbol, followed by the seqeunce ID. 
FASTA format stores multiple sequence records. (https://www.researchsolutions.com/blog/fasta-format-what-research-scientists-should-know)

### How much computer storage is required for 1000 Genomes
- Associated costs
- Cost factors
- Raw Storage costs
- Familiarize with VCF format

➡specification in article collection

Please provide 1-page size estimates and reasoning for the use of the different file types 
(i.e. which would you use for storing called variants, which for full archival purposes, browser
visualisation), for 3-5 formats.

summarize the file formats, how are storage costs influenced, some estimations for exampe ahuman 
genome, what to use best for what

sources: 
