## **Data Cooperatives for Aggregation of Personal Data** 

In his paper *"Personal Data Cooperatives -- A New Data Governance Framework for Data Donations and Precision Health"* Ernst Hafen proposes the establishment of cooperatives as a framework for data sharing and data donation:

Biomedical research is increasingly data-driven and, especially for precision medicine, it is crucial to examine a large number of cases. However, data relevant to health research, such as medical records, registry databases or personal data recorded with the sensors of a smartphone, is stored in many different unlinked silos. Thus, although many individuals are willing to share their data with researchers, the aggregation of individual data to allow for data mining is challenging.\
Hafen suggests that data cooperatives could promote this much needed data aggregation and therefore accelerate research efforts in the medical field. The rationale for such citizen-owned data cooperatives lies in the fact that the individuals themselves are the most legitimate actors to advance the aggregation of their personal data. Any person who wants to store health-relevant data of any kind, such as data derived from electronic health records, registry databases, data recorded with the sensors of a smartphone and imported from mobile apps as well as multi-omics data generated in research studies, can become a member of such a data cooperative. Thus, every member aggregates its own data from multiple separates sources.\
Academic research groups, pharmaceutical companies or data companies can request access to this data and these requests will be examined by an oversight committee of the data cooperative, based on scientific and ethical criteria. However, the individual member itself ultimately decides under which conditions it wants to grant access to its data. Additionally, the committee will negotiate a price for the access to these data or for the recruitment of patients for clinical trials. These revenues will partly be used to maintain the platform, partly be invested according to statutory aims. Furthermore, the cooperative ensures that the results of the research projects carried out with the data retrieved from the cooperative will be published, also in the case of negative findings. This puts citizens involved in data cooperatives in control of both the use of and the economic and intellectual benefit from the data.\

As far as I'm concerned, I would definitively share my genome data for academic research and could envisage to deposit it on a platform such as MiData. However, I wouldn't perform any of these direct-to-consumer tests: First of all, the questions that are supposed to be answered either aren't of great interest me (such as ancestry) or the answers are neither reliable nor helpful. Especially in the case of tests for disease traits, a clinically meaningful interpretation of the results can be very difficult. Furthermore, the risks associated with genetic screening shouldn't be neglected and, as for every screening method, clinical trials are needed to determine the value of a certain intervention. Second, I don't want to provide these companies access to my data, which is used for their own economical profit, e.g. by generating intellectual property.\

**Sources:**\
\* Hafen, Ernst. "Personal Data Cooperatives -- A New Data Governance Framework for Data Donations and Precision Health." The Ethics of Medical Data Donation, edited by Jenny Krutzinna et. al., Springer, 16 January 2019.pp. 141--149. <doi:10.1007/978-3-030-04363-6_9>\
\* Blasimme, A., Vayena, E. & Hafen, E. "Democratizing Health Research Through Data Cooperatives". Philos. Technol. 31, 473-- 479 (2018). \<<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13347-018-0320-8>\>\
\* <https://www.midata.coop/genossenschaft/>
