# Genome Resources

With the rapidly growing field of molecular biology, the data that is gathered is growing exponentially. To handle all this data and unlock the potential that lies within it we need biobanks with standardized data formats and regulations to enable international data sharing. Genome browsers allow worldwide access to genetic inforamtion, which plays a prominent role in approaching the future of personalized medicine, where treatments can be tailored specifically to patients, directly based on their genetic code. 

These are some of the most common genome resource webpages there are:
 * [UCSC Human Genome Browser Gateway](http://genome.cse.ucsc.edu)
 * [Ensembl Human Genome Server](http://useast.ensembl.org)
 * [NCBI Human Genome Guide](http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)

## Table of Genome Resources
Genome Resource | Notes
---|---
 [**UCSC GENOME BROWSER**](http://genome.cse.ucsc.edu) | <ul>Browser contains many tools which are developed and updated by the USCS Genome Browser Team, such as:<ul><li>Genome Browser</li><li>BLAT</li><li>In-Silico PCR</li><li>LiftOver</li></ul> In the Genome Browser you can search for specific positions or gene symbols within a variety of species, which range from humans to rabbits to fish and many more. It is the most widely used genome browser in the world, since it has such a wide range of species to search for. <br> UCSC has also added a section regarding COVID-19 Research , which can be explored with the SARS-CoV-2 genome browser.<br> They could use an updated GUI. The one in place now seems rather old and outdated. I feel like we're in a aera where it wouldn't be too much to ask for a perhaps more intuitive and welcoming GUI for such an important browser. At least browsing the different species is nicely displayed with a phylogenetic tree and nice layout.</ul>
 [**Ensembl Human Genome Server**](http://useast.ensembl.org)| <ul>Ensembl is a genome browser for vertebrate genomes that supports research in comparative genomics, evolution, sequence variation and transcriptional regulation. Ensembl annotates genes, computes multiple alignments, predicts regulatory function and collects disease data. Ensembl tools include: <ul><li>BLAST/BLAT: Search genomes for a DNA or protein sequence</li><li>BioMart: Export custom datasets from Ensembl with this data-mining tool </li><li>Variant Effect Predictor (VEP): Analyse your own variants and predict the functional consequences of known and unknown variants for all supported species</li><li>File Chameleon: Convert Ensembl files for use with other analysis tools</li><li>Assembly Converter: Map (liftover) your data's coordinates to the current assembly.</li></ul>
 [**NCBI Human Genome Guide**](http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)| <ul>This is the National Center for Biotechnology Information. It is an entry point for genome reference data, which can be uploaded to the database. It contains human genome assemblies, which were part of the Human Genome Project (HGP). Human variant collections can be download, such as:<ul><li>dbVar: Database of human genomic Structural Variation. Large variants >50 bp including insertions, deletions, duplications, inversions, mobile elements, translocations, and complex variants</li><li>ClinVar: Aggregates information about genomic variation and its relationship to human health.</li><li>dbSNP: Contains human single nucleotide variations, microsatellites, and small-scale insertions and deletions along with publication, population frequency, molecular consequence, and genomic and RefSeq mapping information for both common variations and clinical mutations.</li></ul> It is a very User-freindly interface that is nice to interact with.

 
